---
layout: default
title: "POLSC401: Ethics and Public Policy"
course_description: "An examination of the role that ethical, cultural, religious, and moral principles play in the formulation and execution of public policy by lawmakers and other public officials. Explores existing issues in domestic and international policy, including justice, equality, fairness, individual liberty, free enterprise, charity, and human rights."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "POLSC401: Ethics and Public Policy"
--------------------------------------------------------

Students of political science should understand how ethics, culture,
religion, and morality help to shape public debate, policymaking, and
policy execution. This course will provide you with an overview of the
role that ethical, cultural, religious, and moral principles play in the
formulation and execution of public policy by lawmakers and other public
officials. After studying the foundational theories of ethics and
morality in politics, you will review arguments about existing issues in
domestic and international policy, studying each dilemma from a variety
of perspectives.  Common themes seen in ethics debates include justice,
equality, fairness, individual liberty, free enterprise, charity,
fundamental human rights, and minimizing harm to others. These themes
are integrated into various decision-making models, such as the
Utilitarian Approach, the Fairness and Justice Approach, and the Rights
Approach. In the execution of public policy, it is impossible to do no
harm to others; often, public policy requires the redistribution of
resources, denial of rights or privileges, or promotion of one group at
the expense of another.  Decision-making frameworks are used to help
balance competing interests and make the best, or sometimes “the least
worst,” decision.  In this course, you will examine five types of
decision frameworks used to make and implement public policy, as well as
rationales used to justify inequitable impact and outcomes of policies.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  

-   Explain how personal morality and ethics impact the policymaking
    process.
-   Discuss various ethical frameworks used to resolve policy dilemmas.
-   Identify statutes, ethical codes, and legal opinions that define the
    normative parameters of key domestic and international policy
    issues.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt., .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Have competency in the English language.  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf).  
  
 √    Have completed and passed the following courses: 

-   [POLSC101: Introduction to
    Politics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/polsc101/)
-   [POLSC201: Introduction to Western Political
    Thought](http://www.saylor.org/courses/polsc201/)
-   [POLSC231: Introduction to American
    Politics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/polsc231/)

### Course Information

Welcome to POLSC401.  Below, please find general information on the
course and its requirements.

**Course Designer**: Dr. Sharon Jumper

**Primary Resources: **This course is composed of a range of different
free, online materials.  However, the course makes primary use of the
following:

-   Lee Archie and John G. Archie: “[Introduction to Ethical Studies: An
    Open Source
    Reader](http://philosophy.lander.edu/ethics/ethicsbook/book1.html)”
    (HTML)
-   U.S. State Department: “[Human Rights in
    Brief](http://www.america.gov/publications/books/human-rights-in-brief.html)”
    (HTML or PDF)

**Requirements for Completion: **In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials. 
Pay special attention to Units 1 and 2, in which you will learn about
ethics in philosophical terms, as well as study various decision-making
frameworks used by policymakers seeking to balance competing interests
and reach the most ethical solutions to problems.  In Units 3–10, you
will study the application of each framework to types of commonly seen
problems in government and assess the outcomes that each framework
offers in a given situation. You will also need to complete the Final
Exam.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam. 
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through all of the course material.    
  
 In order to “pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.

**Time Commitment: **This course should take you a total of **143.25
hours** to complete.  Each unit includes a “time advisory” that lists
the amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit.  These
time advisory sections should help you plan your time accordingly.  It
may be useful to take a look at these time advisories and determine how
much time you have over the next few weeks to complete each unit, and
then set goals for yourself.  For example, Unit 1 should take you 10
hours.  Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to
complete subunits 1.1 (a total of 4 hours) on Monday night, subunit 1.2
(a total of 3 hours) on Tuesday night, etc.

**Tips/Suggestions:**  Ethics is difficult for students who like clearly
defined “right and wrong” answers.  In governance, issues are often
quite complex and not amenable to absolute solutions.  Policymakers must
often choose the “least harmful” option, rather than the “right” one. 
Learned scholars and politicians acting in good faith also might apply
the same framework to the same problem and get different outcomes, due
to biased perspectives.  Keep this in mind as you work through the
resources in this course.

Also, as you review the resources in this course, take comprehensive
notes.  These notes will serve as a useful review as you prepare for the
Final Exam.

### Preliminary Information

-   **Principles of Economics**

    Link: [*Principles of
    Economics*](http://www.saylor.org/site/textbooks/Principles%20of%20Economics.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     You will be prompted to read sections of this book throughout the
    course.  You may choose to download the text in full now and skip to
    the appropriate section as prompted by the instructions in the
    resource boxes below, or you can simply download the specific
    sections of the text assigned as you progress through each resource
    box.  
      
     Terms of Use: The text was adapted by The Saylor Foundation under
    the [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/) without
    attribution as requested by the work's original creator or licensee.


